---
layout: post
title: Gulp
---

##### tl;dr - Gulp is an awesome tool.

We have a new team project at work to update and upgrade a Chrome extension that we use all the time. I'm very excited about this because it gives me an opportunity to work on a coding project during work hours and for the benefit of my team, so even though I still want to keep working on personal projects, the pressure of needing to code outside of work is lifted somewhat.

Since this extension already exists, the first task for this project was to establish my environment, get version control set up, and study the existing codebase. This extension uses [Gulp](https://gulpjs.com/) for a number of build tasks, including creating a necessary file for Chrome to recognize the project. I've never used gulp before, so I had to go read the docs and figure out what our gulpfile was doing.

### What is Gulp?

Gulp is a simple and powerful JavaScript library to automate repetative tasks that would otherwise be cumbersome and tedious. It requires node.js and is particularly useful for manipulating and watching your file system for changes.

### Setup

To get started, you need to install the gulp command line utility...
    npm install --global gulp-cli

...and then install the package in your project directory
    npm install --save-dev gulp

Go ahead and verify that it works with `gulp --version`

### Gulpfile

To use Gulp, you need a gulpfile. The gulpfile is where all of your gulp commands live. The primary API in Gulp is the `task()`. The basic syntax of a task is like this:
    gulp.task('name-of-task', taskFunction() {
      //some code
    })

If the name of your task is "copyToDatabase" then you could run this task with `gulp copyToDatabase` in the command line.

A single task can do a lot of things at once, but Gulp also provides `series()` and `parallel()` APIs to chain tasks into larger operations.

In our project, we use the `src()` and `dest()` methods, and the `pipe()` API to create a filestream and manipulate files to produce a valid Chrome extension. `src()` and `dest()` interact directly with your filesystem, telling the computer which source directory to look at, and which destination directory to send output to. The `pipe()` API chains and transforms the files in the stream.

Here's an example of a task that updates a file we've changed and sends it to a production folder:
    gulp.task('send_file_to_prod', function(devFile) {
      return gulp.src('./jsFiles/' + devFile + '.js')
        .pipe(rename('prodFile.js'))
        .pipe(gulp.dest('prodFolder/'))
      });

The [Gulp docs](https://gulpjs.com/docs/en/api/concepts) are very clean and easy to read, and it was a good experience for me to use the docs to learn about a tool I was unfamiliar with. I also watched a (short crash course video on it)[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1rw9MfIleEg&ab_channel=TraversyMedia], and these two resources got me up to speed quickly!

I'm looking forward to using Gulp more in the future to make my coding easier.
